[AIP-165] Purge (#384)
googleapis/aip: aip/0165.md

---
aip:
  id: 165
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-09-18
permalink: /165
redirect_from:
  - /0165
---

# Criteria-based delete

Occasionally, an API may need to provide a mechanism to delete a large number

> of resources based on given query parameters, rather than requiring the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of resources based on some set of filter parameters, rather than requiring the
```

> individual resource name of the resources being deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
individual resource name of the resources to be deleted.
```

This is a rare case, reserved for situations where users need to delete
thousands or more resources at once, in which case the normal Batch Delete

> pattern ([AIP-235][]) becomes infeasible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern ([AIP-235][]) becomes unwieldy and inconvenient.
```

## Guidance

**Important:** Most APIs **should** use only Delete ([AIP-135][]) or Batch
Delete ([AIP-235][]) for deleting resources, and **should not** implement
deleting based on criteria. This is because deleting is generally irreversible

> and it is possible for a user to irrecovably lose data with a careless query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and this type of operation makes it easy for a user to accidentally lose data significant amounts of data.
```

An API **may** implement a Purge method to permit deleting a large number of
resources based on a filter string; however, this **should** only be done if

> the Batch Delete ([AIP-235][]) pattern is insufficient to achieve the use case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Batch Delete ([AIP-235][]) pattern is insufficient to accomplish the desired goal:
```

- The `parent` field **should** be included in the URI. If the API wishes to
  support deletion across multiple parents, it **should** accept the `-`
  character consistent with [AIP-159][].

### Request message

Purge methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message PurgeBooksRequest {
  // The publisher to purge books from.
  // To purge books across publishers, send "publishers/-".
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library-example.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // A filter matching the books to be purged.
  string filter = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // Actually perform the purge.
  // If `force` is set to false, the method will return a sample of
  // resource names that would be deleted.
  bool force = 3;
}
```

- The `filter` field **should** be required, and **must** follow the same
  semantics as in List methods (see [AIP-132][]).
- The `force` field **must** be included. If it is not set, the API **must**
  return a count of the resources that would be deleted as well as a sample of

>   those resources, without actually performing the deletion.

Reviewer: We need to be a bit more clear on what "a sample" means.

### Response message

Purge methods implement a common response message pattern:

```proto
message PurgeBooksResponse {
  // The number of books that this request deleted (or, if `force` is false,
  // the number of books that will be deleted).

>   int32 purge_count = 1;

Reviewer: Per our discussion: we shoudl clarify that this may be an estimate, and cite AIP-158's use of total_size for comparison.

>   // A sample of the books that will be deleted.

Reviewer 2: Presumably this is "the resource names of the books that will be deleted"? Worth clarifying.

Reviewer: Yep. Seems right to me.

Author: Done.

  // Only populated if `force` is set to false.

>   repeated string purge_sample = 2;

Reviewer: We should clarify that this is "up to N items matching the filter criteria". "Up to" is important, akin to how page_size works in AIP-158.

}
```

- The `purge_count` field **should** be included, and provide the number of
  resources that were deleted (or would be deleted). This count **may** be an
  estimate (but the service **should** document this if so).
- The `purge_sample` field **should** be included: If `force` is `false`, it
  **should** provide a sample of resource names that will be deleted. If
  `force` is true, this field **should not** be populated.

> 

Reviewer: We should also make it clear that even if both purge_count and purge_sample are missing, force is still required to be explicit in the request that we intend to remove the items matching the filter. Yes, it's a bit repetitive, but we're talking about blasting out potentially thousands of rows in a single HTTP request....
